allowed him to work with me just before I entered
the Air Force. In the succeeding four years, he was
able to develop a fairly substantial department
that was grossly inadequate to take care of the
community, but at least by numbers of people, it
was beginning to be a department with some
specialization.
However, shortly after I came back with the
department, Mr. Wingo went with the Ford
Foundation and left the department without a
head. What year would that be? That was in 1956 or
early 57. We had a fairly progressive city
administration, and they recruited nationwide
and brought in a new director of planning whose
name was Merle Phillips. You mentioned a
progressive city administration. Do you recall
who the mayor was at that time? Yes, it was a Tom
Rogers. He was a one-term mayor. He did quite a bit
for the community. He was a very substantial
mayor, but was not re-elected, perhaps because of
that. What was the background of the new city
planning director? The new city planning
director was actually
from Iowa. by way of California, was primarily in
physical planning, strong in subdivision and
thoroughfare design, this sort of thing, and took
a great deal of interest in the development of or
the updating of the thoroughfare plan for the
community. Had the comprehensive plan for the
city been updated during that period? It was being
updated piecemeal, in-house, without the
benefit of consultants or extra help. So
consequently, it was dragging along, had been
dragging along during Mr. Wingo's years. And when
the new director, Merle Phillips, came in, he was
able to hire a number of young planners who came in
and began to develop pieces of this updated plan.
It seems rather remarkable. The city had a staff,
when he came in, of only seven planners. Yet it was
going through one of its most dramatic growth
phases. And it surely must have outstripped the
plan documents and their relevance during that
time. I suppose the kind of seat of the pants and
plan as you go was the way current planning
subdivisions and zoning cases had to be handled.
This is true. So far as subdivisions go, for
example, there was originally a few subdivisions
that came through in the post-war years were
handled sort of on an individual basis, where
coordination between the city departments
sometimes non-existent or not very satisfactory
so consequently a method was developed to route a
cloth map around to all the agencies that were
thought to have some interest you developed that
method didn't you no this this was one that was was
with the community uh i guess mr stock will
probably develop this They were essentially just
routing a map around, a purported final map, and
all of the city officials. Well, this was a map. A
map only. How long did it take to gather all the
comments together? Really, there were no
comments. They were just signatures. So
consequently, if the consulting engineer was
skilled in browbeating the city officials to get
their signatures, he could go ahead and get his map
through reasonably promptly. But it literally
might take days or weeks, and not a whole lot of
coordination, really. Just a matter of, here's a
map, look okay to you, yeah, it's fine, we'll sign
here, type sort of. That must have made it
difficult if there were comments that were in
conflict with each other. This is right. And
sometimes it was possible to play off one serious
objection to a, say a circulation plan for a
subdivision, against another comment from
another city official. It wasn't very
satisfactory, but it was at least some way to sort
of coordinate new subdivisions with what existed
then as a city plan. This was not satisfactory. It
took a lot of time on the part of the consultant. It
took a lot of time, and it wasn't possible for the
city officials to really put a sufficient thought
into the subdivision and its impact on the Long
Range community. The city had a very different
relationship with the development community at
that time. have heard, at least, that up until a
period in the 50s, the city engineering
department designed the streets. This is right.
This was a... They designed the profiles of the
streets. Right. This took some of the problems
that we experienced in a fairly recent time away.
At least there was one agency that was totally
responsible for the design of streets. And it
occurs to me the only thing we have similar to that
today is the design of the water and sewer system,
which is done through local water utilities. Yes,
this is right. Let's go back for a moment to the
planning director who had just been hired. This
had been created about 1956, you said? In about 50,
1957, Mr. Phillips was hired, and he was able to
build the department up somewhat
to the size it really should have been to
accommodate the needs of the community. So it grew
from seven people to? About 20 or so. 20 people. And
were there any other changes in the structure or
administration of the department during that
time? Yes, it was divided. once and for all into
divisions at the time, advanced planning and
current planning, and the semblance of a
cartography section to provide for the special
products that were needed in the planning
process. So at that time the city planning
department became the creator and caretaker of
the zoning maps? Zoning maps and aerial photos and
all the tools of the trade. And Mr. Phillips, how
long was he the planning director? For a
relatively short period of time. Unfortunately,
he found that the rather modest salary was scaled,
and the prevalent in the community wasn't
satisfactory, and he went into consulting a
little on his own. While he was planning director?
While he was planning director, and this, of
course, got him into a little bit of a problem.
Perhaps a conflict of interest occasionally.
Occasionally a conflict of interest, and
ultimately he moved on,
leaving behind the structure and the functioning
organization and many of the, some of the people
left in that period of time, receiving problems.
But most of the structure remained behind, and the
leadership was taken over by the a traffic
engineer. What was his name? His name was Joseph
Naden. He's a man who's, I recall, much of our
signalization system and such in the city traces
back to him. He was a good traffic engineer,
wouldn't you say? A very solid traffic engineer.
He had a good, strong method of expressing himself
and was able to compromise at times to make things
work. Was he able to effectively administer the
planning department as well as his traffic
engineering duties? Really, he turned the... He
was able to keep together and to perform certain
leadership functions, but he turned the actual
planning functions over to the principals that
were involved in the sections, saying something
to the effect that, I don't know anything about
planning, you take care of it, do the job, do what's
required, we'll go on from there. This was only a
short-term situation, which incidentally
lasted probably six months to a year, at which time
the city fathers recruited a gentleman
by the name of John Cunningham from the King County
area of Washington State, who came into the area
with a good deal of knowledge and abilities. Who
was the mayor at that time? I believe the mayor was
Mayor Sightsinger, and he gave, the mayor and
councilor gave a good deal of support at that time
to Mr. Cunningham since we'd gone through several
months or quite a few number of months of problems
of one sort or the other.
And consequently, John wanted to get as much
accomplished as he could while this honeymoon
period was in effect. And it was during this period
that we were able to implement a number of ideas
that we had had that for one reason or the other had
not been able to bring them on board. Let's go back
to the, you mentioned the means of, of routing a map
for a subdivision plot to different agencies and
how cumbersome that process was. You had some
different ideas about that, didn't you? Yes. This
is one of the things that we were able to get into
effect not too long after Mr. Cunningham came
here. I, over a long period of time, had developed
the idea that the best way to coordinate physical
planning matters, including subdivisions and
street and alley vacations and elements of the
major thoroughfares plan, et cetera, et cetera,
was through a meeting of key people in agencies and
departments that were concerned with physical
planning in the community. I first had ideas on it
when we were handling subdivision maps before the
I went into the Air Force. When I came back, I had
some definite ideas, along the ideas of a regular
meeting of responsible city and county and state,
possibly even federal officials, who were
concerned with these matters. And it wasn't until
Mr. Cunningham came on board that I was actually
able to
get the idea approved. This concept I call the
subdivision and coordinating committee, or
subdivision coordinating committee. Really, it
involved more than coordinating subdivisions,
but that was a nice, catchy name, and it seemed to
stick, and still sticks to this day. The first
meeting was called, and it was the heads of the
public utilities in the community, electric,
telephone, water, sewer, and gas, the City
Engineering Department, representatives from
some of the Department of Planning, Tax
Department, and a few other agencies. The concept
was explained, a regular meeting on the same day
each week to review these physical planning
matters, and it was seized upon with great
enthusiasm because many of these people felt they
were not able to do the job because of the press of
time and the press of trying to review these
physical planning matters. By mutual consent,
Wednesday was selected as the day that the
committee would meet. And with a few exceptions,
mainly around the holidays, this committee has
met for over 25 years, 58 to the present, another 30
years. For a brief period, I served as the
subdivision coordinator for the city. And it was a
tremendous vehicle for making the subdivision
coordinator's job simpler. generally kept
referring to the Subdivision Coordinating
Committee simply as the SCC, but it made the
preparation of comments a painless task to have a
meeting where we could discuss the subdivisions
proposed or that had recently come in, provide a
map copy to every member of the committee,
standard routine two-week period after which
comments were returned, and we could then
assemble one unified set of comments, discuss
them, and present them in a timely fashion. We were
able to gather together the input and do our job
within the 30-day time period the statute
stipulates. Exactly. It always seemed it was kind
of a joke that the SEC was held together with
donuts. It was kind of an interesting means of
keeping it together that members alternated
bringing a snack for each other. Was this from the
outset? Was this delivered? No, this really began
when we were meeting for a period of time at the El
Paso Electric Company meeting room. And they
started the tradition of coffee and donuts. And
that's where it began. And then after we moved back
to planning facilities,
to city facilities, this tradition had just
established on a rotating basis by all the
members, so it was not a big burden on anybody. The
Department Heads Development Coordinating
Committee is another group that meets on a weekly
basis. This came about after John Cunningham took
over, didn't it? It came about, I guess, about 15 or
20 years after the SCC was established, and I
believe that the basis upon which it was
established was probably a consultant had come
into town and said, gee, it would be great if the
department heads would get together and consider
matters of zoning and subdivision and physical
planning and coordinate these things, probably
without even realizing that it had such a concept
for all those years. It does strike me that it was a
bit of a duplication. Today, the department heads
development coordinating committee reviews and
virtually votes on matters of rezoning, and it's
their decision which becomes the official staff
position. What was the process for making that
official staff recommendation on matters of
rezoning prior to the department head's meeting?
As far as zoning is concerned, this was a staff
function of the Department of Planning as far as
recommendations. The SEC never was involved in
zoning matters. The staff would make its
recommendations in accordance with the plan for
the area, in accordance with the pros and cons, and
really leave the decision to the planning
commission. They didn't make hard and fast
recommendations. They merely showed, laid out
the groundwork so the commission could make an
intelligent decision. You refer to their
decisions were based, of course, on the plan
documents which existed. And we were talking
earlier about during the transition of
leadership in the planning department, the
comprehensive plan was being updated on a more or
less piecemeal basis. Prior to John Cunningham
taking over the department, was that task
completed? Really, I can't say that it was ever
completed. But there was a constant review of
various elements of the plan. And this process
continued after John Cunningham came. So rather
than a ever so often complete update of the plan, it
was simply the ongoing process that it always is.
It was exactly an ongoing process of elements,
first one element and the other, so that it was a
fairly living kind of a document, fairly well
updated. never really formally prepared and
published. Not necessarily compiled into a
single document and taken in one fell swoop for
approval by the Council. Correct. Was the Council
aware of the planned document? Was there a
semblance of official approval of the planning
thinking as to what was going on? Yes, I think there
was. It was easy to refer to this nebulous document
with all these elements that had been worked on,
and I think there's a fair degree of comprehension
that it existed and fairly well accepted by the
council and by other governmental entities. And
awareness and tacit approval without
necessarily an official or systematic process
for it. Correct. It seemed for a while that the
planning department was a stepchild. I know it
wasn't necessarily housed with the rest of the
city offices. Do you recall some of the different
facilities that the department was located
in? Originally, when I went to work for the
department, it was in the old city hall. And it was
later moved
to, because of space requirements and the fact
that the city government was going, to a separate
lease facility
on Kansas Street. This was a fairly modest
facility, but it was probably three times the
space that it had in the old city hall. It stayed
there for a number of years through the early and
middle 50s, then moved when, after Mr. Wingo had
left, and actually after Mr. Phillips had left, it
moved to another facility at I think it was 212
South Campbell, a rather large old equipment
sales building, very large reinforced concrete,
lots of space, which was piecemeal remodeled over
a long period of time to provide for meeting rooms
and various office facilities, even a coffee shop
where the subdivision coordinating committee
was. conceived and created. From there the
department was moved to another location and I
don't recall the address but it's another
separate building and it wasn't until the new city
hall was constructed that the department
actually became a part of the rest of the city. The
fact that the department wasn't necessarily
located in the same building as the elected
leaders and city council chambers and some of the
other city departments. Do you think that implied
anything in terms of relationship with planning,
or was that simply a circumstantial space? I think
it really depended upon who viewed it. Some people
probably said, get those ivory tower people out of
the way and don't have to worry about them. I think
the department did a pretty good idea. It got it
away from politics somewhat and was able to
function in its own way independently and then
make its presentation to the governmental
entities at the right time. It was a degree of
independence that was created that way, I think.
I'm going to ask you a question now that is asked of
every person that has been interviewed for this.
If you could think about it for a moment and tell us
what you would consider to be the five or so major
events that have affected the planning and
development of El Paso.
Well, you'd have to go ahead and say that the
phenomenal growth after the war, just completely
outpacing the ability of government to provide
services, for a period of time.
Perhaps this gave more awareness on the part of the
elected officials of the importance and need for
planning. This is right. Because of this
inadequacy,
I think there's a great deal more recognition that
They needed the help of professionals in
providing for the extension of the services
required to serve this growing community. The
much heralded Shama's Isle settlement certainly
was a major effect on the community and caused a
great deal of disruption.
opened up avenues for improvement in the south
side area. Another huge impact, particularly the
east-west freeway, Interstate 10, totally
disrupted the older area of town and created
changes that are continuing to this day.
Redirected our growth forever. Exactly. And to a
lesser degree, the north-south were able to
accommodate. Now I don't think it's nearly the
same. Perhaps its impact is yet to be felt.
Exactly. Another very large effect, back in about
1954, the Public Service Board, which provides
the water for the community, perceived the need to
stabilize
and to secure as much water resource as possible in
order to accomplish this,
purchased from individuals, sometimes with a
threat of condemnation, but more often a friendly
purchase. And from the state, huge areas of land,
particularly the north, west, and northeast,
everything essentially north of the city limits
from the Fort Bliss Military Reservation east to
the Mexico State line north of the city. This did
one very large thing. It placed under public
protection land which could be exploited on a more
controlled basis and developed to provide for
public facilities and an orderly disposal of the
land. to provide for more orderly growth pattern
in that area. Consequently, you've had a little
bit more stable development in those areas than
you have to the east and southeast.
In fact, a good amount of the land that's still held
by El Paso Water Utilities is yet to be developed,
and plans are being undertaken Who knows? It may be
that the northernmost portion of northeast El
Paso will develop along the lines of Cielo Vista,
with the public body being the governing force of
the development pattern. The difference,
really, between the airport development in Cielo
Vista and the public service board concept of
development in northeast, the public service
board wanted to stay out of the master planning
area and let private enterprise working in
conjunction with the governmental forces,
developed the area to its highest and best use in
accordance with the master plan for the city.
There was a great deal less governmental input,
except from the Department of Planning, in the
northeast area and the northwest area, land that
was owned by the Public Service Board originally.
than there was in the airport area. Of course,
beyond this airport area, it was at the bottom.
The Sierra Vista area, by the way, was about 3,000
acres, I believe. Sizable land park. Right. And
the public service board owned and owns about 35 or
so sections of land. Okay. Incidentally, this
land has been sold by the Public Service Board on a
sealed bid basis in increments
in a way that public facilities like school sites,
arterials, park sites have been reserved and
provided to the various agencies at normal cost,
saving the public money, or at no cost at all in some
cases. Today, El Paso is a very different city than
some of the period we've described. We're a city of
over 400,000. The city of Juarez, the population
estimates vary from a million and a half to who
knows what. We've seen a tremendous amount of
growth. We have some problems with our economy.
Tell me, what do you see as the future direction of
El Paso city planning efforts, say, in the next 10
years?
The biggest problem that El Paso has and the
biggest impact on planning and on our area really
is totally beyond the local community, in my
opinion. We're faced with an immigration
situation, a border situation here,
over which the city itself has no control. We're
talking about some of the wave of immigration
we've seen over the last few years. We're talking
about literally millions of Mexicans, Central
Americans, and South Americans who are moving
north trying to get to this country, and a lot of
them are impacting the El Paso area. We've seen it
through the tremendous growth in Juarez. We've
seen it through the tremendous border crossing
problems that we've had, the impact on the border
patrol trying to control immigration, illegal
immigration to the extent that they have,
unsuccessfully to a large degree. We've seen it in
the invasion of the public facilities that we have
in the community where we're actually and in fact
are providing parks for the city of El Paso and the
city of Juarez with all the supporting taxes
coming from the city. city of el paso that's true we
also see it in our county hospital facilities
we're seeing it in the county hospital facilities
we're seeing it all that the health services that
are available where illegal people people from
another country come in take advantage of the
facilities pay nothing in the way of taxes or
direct contribution and then disappear yet el
paso is a poor community and el paso is a poor
community and it's becoming poorer on account of
these external influences and the rating the
county judge for example presented the bill just
this year i believe it was to the federal
government for eight million dollars for
services that had been rendered by the county
hospital to